Added ADR around nested facet logic implementation (#3020)
alphagov/specialist-publisher-rebuild: docs/adr/0001-implement-nested-facets-tagging-for-specialist-documents-as-a-single-dropdown.md

# 1. Implement nested facets tagging for specialist documents as a single dropdown

Date: 2025-02-14

## Status

Proposed

## Related PRs

- [Implemented as part of this PR](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/pull/2923)

## Context

Nested facets are required by a department as part of their new finder. Their existing finder contains: 

- For filtering, a "Facet" dropdown and a "Sub facet" dropdown to filter for documents. Users are able to filter through a single facet value lookup at a time. 
- The documents are tagged with multiple Facet and Sub facet values

> We need to be able to replicate this behaviour with minimal efforts. Decisions and analysis have been outlined in [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GaSnboJ8_0KnCd3uaCDxuJg0JtECh45hOfLnuoDkaAI/edit?tab=t.0). 

Reviewer: I don't particularly like referring to Google Docs in an ADR, I feel the ADR should stand alone.

## Decision

What we have implemented:

- On the publisher side for tagging, a single dropdown that merges the facets' values (main facet and sub facets, essentially leaf nodes)

> - When we send the document to Publishing API, we write logic into the document model to figure out whether the leaf node is a parent facet or sub-facet value in the dropdown, and split the metadata we send to Publishing API into its own facet and a separate sub-facet in `specialist-publisher/app/models/document.rb` 

Reviewer 2: Just checking whether what's written here is what's been implemented. The ADR implies (to me) that publishers can choose both "sub facets" and parent "facets" from the dropdown - but I'm only seeing subfacets in the dropdown on https://specialist-publisher.integration.publishing.service.gov.uk/trademark-decisions/new.

Author: @ChrisBAshton similar to point above - in our implementation: 
- we allow main facets to be defined _without_ subfacets. It would show up in the dropdown if that is the case. Unfortunately for this finder, it doesn't have any main facets without sub facets. 
- what we don't allow, is if the main facet has sub-facets, then you can only choose the sub-facets (leaf nodes). Reason being we still have things to clarify about that behaviour (is it equivalent to tagging _all_ subs, or _no_ subs). Since the current finder doesn't require it, i thought de-scoping would be fine.

happy to discuss further

  - Reasons for this being if we send them as separate facets, we can keep Publishing API and Search API functionality unchanged. 
- When we load the edit page or new page again, the document is loaded from Publishing API, with the facet and sub-facet being separate facets, but the dropdown element expects a combined leaf node dropdown as mentioned in the first point, so we have to merge them back together again into the main facet field in `specialist-publisher/app/controllers/documents_controller.rb`.

## Consequences

Pros: 

- Restrict user input to only valid options with a single dropdown. 
- This supports both multiple select entries and single select entries. 
- The workflow discussed as part of analysis document works.

Cons:

- Logic to merge the parent facet values, sub-facet values at form phase, split them at send phase, merge them again at load phase might be a little convoluted.

## Alternatives proposed

### Have tagging done as 2 separate facets with validation 

> Even on publisher side, surface all of a facet's parents facets as one dropdown, and all of the sub-facets as a separate dropdown. As outlined on [this branch](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/compare/intellectual-property-office-finder_2?expand=1).

Reviewer 2: Suggest linking to the commit instead, as the branch can easily be deleted in future, but the commit should live forever (citation needed!)

```suggestion
Even on publisher side, surface all of a facet's parents facets as one dropdown, and all of the sub-facets as a separate dropdown. As outlined in [this commit](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/commit/c7346db771df5ccafd5fff8f7f687a8211436f6a).
```

Pros:

> - Consistency of 2 separate facets being displayed to users upon tagging and viewing metadata. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure this consistency is really a pro, is it? These are two separate user groups so there isn't really any added value in having a similar UX

Author: yea agreed, i'm also not keen on having validation to cross check across the two fields - but we'd note it here in any case as part of the alternatives we'd considered.

- No change logic required to split or merge facets

Cons:

- Repeat of information. The sub-facets are also prefixed with parent facet in any case (e.g. to differentiate between multiple "Not Applicable" sub-facet entries). Users will have to tag both parent facet and the sub-facet with the prefix. 

> - There is no structural tie between the parent facet and the sub-facet when tagging. Nothing stopping the user from tagging mismatching pairs or not tagging a sub-facet. 

Reviewer 2: "Not tagging a sub-facet" is allowed though, isn't it? As per our [assumptions](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GaSnboJ8_0KnCd3uaCDxuJg0JtECh45hOfLnuoDkaAI/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.cpq4r1qiln6j).

Author: hmm I'm not sure we clarified between 
- Having a mixture of leaf nodes - hence tagging a main-facet because it doesn't have sub-facets
- Tagging a main-facet only despite it also having sub-facets

I think in the future we do want to support tagging main-facet only despite having sub-facets, but we felt like we could clarify that later down the line, as the current MVP doesn't require it.

Reviewer 2: Ahh fair enough.
